A]INTRODUCTION PAGE 

1) content and motivation 
-> see proposal and presentation notes 

The international covid-19 pandemic is a period for social upheaval. It is essential to research the full impact that coronavirus and the measures enforced by governments as a result of the outbreak have on individuals and populations. Our research will contribute to the search of the impact of covid-19 in London.
While we will be careful not to generalize our research, if our data analysis suggests a correlation between covid-19 and variation of crime statistics in 2020 then our study can be a basis for further research on the matter. 
However, not all kinds of crimes saw an increase during the pandemic (Ashby, 2020). For example, previous research on burglary presents conflicting results. Therefore, it is important to conduct further studies as to clarify this discrepancy and to allow the government or the police to take actions. 



#literature review:

In 2020 the world was submerged by the outbreak of a highly contagious virus: covid-19. The international epidemic following the outbreak of the virus was and continues to be an unprecedented historic event and a period of social upheaval. Researchers have shown that social and economic changes have a major effect on crime trends (unodc.org ; Ivaschenko, et al. 2020 , Hossain, 2019 ; Ohlin, 1968 ). Therefore, our group thought it interesting to conduct research on the effect that the pandemic had on crime focusing on a specific geographical area. 

Stickle and Felson, two American criminal justice researchers have rightly called the outbreak of coronavirus the “largest criminological experiment in History” (2020) . This appellation is due to the government ordered lockdowns which completely paused and changed the routine activities of every citizen. An illustration of this is the fact that without commuters during the lockdown, the population of a certain area was unbiased which in turn improved the accuracy of crime rates relative to population size. 

In their article on crime rates during the pandemic, Stickle and Felson explain that the data collected during the pandemic can be used to test criminological theories and explain how crime has changed, the focus of our research project. The scholars suggest that the results from such projects will be crucial in later years in “influencing future crime reduction” (Stickle and Felson, 2020). 

While we will be careful to not generalize our findings, if our data analysis suggests a correlation between the outbreak of covid-19 and variation of crime statistics in 2020 then through future research our study could contribute to the understanding and eventually prevention of crime trends during the pandemic. 

Miller and Blumstein’s study on crime , justice and coronavirus has shown that the international pandemic has been a major challenge for criminal justice systems (2020). But it is also a unique opportunity to reassess the functioning of these systems, for instance incarceration policies because the everyday decisions on probation, parole, pretrial release are taken in a different context during the pandemic and the risk of infection has favoured release of prisoners in order to reduce crowded prisons (Miller and Blumstein 2020). 

“For criminologists and criminal justice scientists, the virus also presents natural experiment conditions allowing for real-world theory tests and observation of the relative effectiveness of practice and policy options under weighty condition.”

Accordingly, our study is motivated by the opportunity of providing a humble insight on crime variations so that policy makers and police forces may be able to use this information to influence future crime reduction and maybe even revaluate criminal systems (Miller and Blumstein, 2020).

Furthermore, our extensive literature review has shown that the full impact of coronavirus on crime is still not understood. This could be partly due to the fact that the pandemic is ongoing.  Nevertheless, while multiple studies examining crime rates since the outbreak of covid-19 have been published, the results of these are mixed (Stickle and Felson, 2020). Merely by reviewing the literature, our team found inconsistencies in recent studies. Stickle and Felson state that initial research has shown crime rates have fallen (2020), whereas, Ashby shows that certain crimes have increased during the pandemic (2020). These inconsistencies illustrate the need for further examination of the topic, hence, our choice of this subject for investigation.  


To contribute to existing research on coronavirus and crime rates, Stickle and Felson encourage conducting a study on “specific types of crimes, in a temporal fashion, and placed based” (2020). This suggestion motivated the framing of our research question. 


#Aims

As previously stated in the literature review, one of our central aims in conducting this research project was to contribute to existing research on the impact that the pandemic has had on crime by focusing on a specific area (London) and crime types (burglary residential and commercial, drug offences: possession and trafficking and sexual offences). 

Secondly, we wished to shed light on the understanding of crime rates during this unprecedented time for the purpose of future crime reduction and policy making within the criminal justice system. 

Lastly, we feel that understanding which crimes have increased during covid19 is essential to raising awareness and providing support for survivors and potential victims. 

Indeed, both newspapers and governmental and intergovernmental organizations have shown that lockdowns have had a negative impact on sexual crimes as more people have become victims to sexual violence. According to The Guardian, the UK’s largest domestic abuse charity, Refuge, reported that calls made to the hotline have increased by 700% since the beginning of the lockdown (12 April 2020).   . Among these cases of domestic abuse are sexual offences. 

We hope that by elucidating the effect that lockdowns have on certain people who have become victims of crime will help enlarge societal responsibility and further urge people to respect government-imposed lockdowns.


#Motivations 

Coronavirus is evidently at the forefront of news headlines. We thought it would be interesting to study a manner in which coronavirus had concretely impacted the world. We chose to look at crime rates in relation to coronavirus because our group is interested in criminology. But also, we had all read and seen sensbilization campaigns on how the lockdowns had increased the rates of domestic abuse. This led to choose to investigate the manner in which coronavirus had infleunces different types of crime in a city we all had in common, London. 

Furthermore, our motivations in choosing to investigate the relationship btween coronavirus and crime were very much inspired by our aims. 
Our group wanted to conduct a study on specific types of crime, in a particular time-frame and concentrated in an area as such research is scarce and needed (Stickle and Felson 2020). 

We were also motivated by the opportunity to research a topic with social significance and possible use. Our study could be the basis for future investigation which could potentially provide insight for police forces and policy makers and raise awareness for the potential victims of such crimes. 




2) explanation of all the variables, city and timeframe 

#Why London?
We chose London because the city has the 3rd highest crime rate in the UK, with 94.9 crimes per 1000 people. Therefore, we expect that there will be enough data and statistics available to support our analysis. 
Additionally, London has the largest population in the UK. hence we felt like the findings from this project would impact and benefit a huge number of individuals
Lastly, to our knowledge and research, there has been no other study that has covered the effect of covid on these specific crimes in London. Thus, we would like to plug that gap in research through this project.  

#Why this timeframe?
The timeframe we are using is from 2008 to 2020.  
We chose this timeframe becase of the datasets which were availble to us found and the predictive model we planned to construct. In order to make a an accurate prediction, a large sample of crime data from years previous to 2020 is needed. We thought that monthly crime rates over a period of 12 years would be a sufficiently large series to make an accurate prediction of crime trends if there had not been an outbrek of coronavirus n 2020. 
While we could make a week-to-week or year-on-year comparisons of weekly or monthly crime counts, we thought that these comparisons risk drawing false conclusions and may not be accurate because they ignore long-term trends (which affect year-on-year comparisons) and seasonal variations (which complicate week to week comparisons) (Ashby, 2020). Thus, we chose to use monthly crim rates for our data. We expect our monthly analysis to take into account the seasonal patterns of crime and therefore, make for a accurate comparison of crime statistics. 



#Why these crimes?
In this section we will explain why we chose to focus on certain crimes. In order to give a broad view on how the pandemic played a role in the variation of crime rates in 2020, we wanted our study to encompass different types of offences which did not belong to a common category. 

•	Sexual offences
The choice of sexual offences as a variable comes from the important amount of news coverage and social media awareness campaigns about the rise in domestic abuse during the government imposed lockdown. Dometic abuse encompasses a wide range of types of abuse such as sexual. According to the crown prosectuion service,domestic abuse can therefore be prosecuted under different offences  . Therefore, our group decided to select one of these offences to investigate specifically. 

Our choice of sexual offences was inspired by feminist motivations. Throughout history, major societal events have affected women’s rights and place in society. The coronavirus pandemic is an event of global social and one day historical significance. We wanted to therefore use our analysis of crime rates in relation to the pandemic to offer a small parenthesis on the effect it has had on women. As sexual offences are categorized as VAWG crimes, crimes primarily but not exclusively perpetrated by men against women , we thought it relevant to look at the evolution of sexual offences since the outbreak of covid19.

There are a range of crimes that can be considered as sexual offences, including non-consensual crimes such as rape or sexual assault, crimes against children including child sexual abuse or grooming, and crimes that exploit others for a sexual purpose, whether in person or online  . These staturotry offences in England and Wales are defined in the 2003 Sexual Offences Act. 
Following our available data we are going to look at sexual offences as a whole. Our data sets defferenciate between rapes and other sexual offences. However, rape is a sexual offence under s.1 o the 2003 SOA and the reader shoudl not be mislead by the dataset to think otherwise. Although our team does not know why the dataset draws this distinction we can conjecture it is because rape is often seen as the gravest sexual offence in society and is the most commonly known by laymen. 


•	Burglary

Previous studies agree on the fact that burglaries, in the absence of special circumstances such as a global pandemic, are more likely to happen in unoccupied homes (Mustaine, 1997; Tseloni et al., 2002) . 
A study conducted by Ashby (2020) analyzed how different types of crime changed after the pandemic by using data from 16 different cities in the USA . When looking at burglary, the study found that in Chicago, Los Angeles, and Memphis the frequency of burglary was around half of the expected amount in the scenario in which there had an outbreak of covid-19. Cities such as Austin, Louisville and Minneapolis did not experience a decrease. Moreover, out of the 11 cities that saw a decrease in burglary, in only one was the difference statistically significant. 

	Another study found ambiguous results when looking at how the rate of burglaries changed after the outbreak of coronavirus in Los Angeles (Campedelli, Aziani and Favarin, 2020) . More precisely, when the authors used a univariate statistical model, the results showed an increase of 0.89% with respect to the predicted value in the absence of state’s interventions, while when they used a multivariate model, a decrease of 0.58%  was found.

Hodgkinson and Andresen (2020) looked at the effect of covid19 on residential and commercial burglary in Vancouver. The likelihood of burglary is strongly related to the presence of a guardian which, during the period of lockdown, varies significantly between residential homes and businesses . In fact, their research found an increase in commercial burglaries, since owners and employees were no longer able to guard their businesses, while residential burglary showed no obvious change. 

The inconsistency of these findings illustrate the need for further research on the impact of coronavirus on burglaries in businesses and in dwellings. 

We will keep this distinction between commerical and residential burglaries as found in our data sets because we hypothesized that the impact of coronavirus differs between both types of burglaries. 


•	Drug offences

A recent report from the UN suggested that drug markets were likely to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. 

On the one hand, the report predicted an increase in drug use. Indeed, drug use has been rising for 20 years due to the population growth. However, the pandemic made the economy suffer and therefore increased unemployment while new opportunities stayed rare (UNODC, June 2020) . Studies show that disadvantaged people earning less have a higher risk to face a drug use disorder which may lead them to take part in drug trafficking activities (Shaw et al., 2007) . 
Following tis reaoning, we ould predict the number of drug offences to rise even more than what expected from March 2020.

On the other hand, the measures implemented in response to the COVID-19 spread induced a shortage of supply of certain drugs. Indeed, drug routes by air or by sea were disrupted due to closed borders and mobility restrictions (Bergeron et al., September 2020) . Therefore, some criminal groups shifted their illicit drug trafficking activity towards other emerging crime opportunities like cybercrime. Others adapted their markets to the restrictions by for example, using land routes which according to the UN report has a higher control rate. As a result, more seizures are being reported on our data sources (UNODC, June 2020). This means it may not be that the drug enforcement activities increased and not the number of drug offences. We acknowledge that this may be later on become a limitation of our study on drug offences.
 
The said-complex impact of COVID-19 on the number of drug offences makes these offences an important crime to study in our research project. 

The major categories of drug-related offences are posession and the dealing and supplying of drugs , which relates to trafficking(gov.uk).  Traficking of drugs is defined as the cultivation, manufacture, distribution and sale of substances which are subject to drug prohibition laws (un.org) . Our London crimes rates dataset for the 24 last months (2019 and 2020) include posession and trafficking drug offences, whereas our dataset for 2008-2018 also provides data for other drug offences. To insure consitency between the datasets we have chosen to take out óther drug offences’. 




-section on biographies
-hypothesis

Burglaries 
Null Hypothesis 1: we hypothesize that the number of residential burglaries decreased after the outbreak of Covid-19
Alternate Hypothesis 1: we hypothesize that the number of residential burglaries did not change after the outbreak of Covid-19

Null Hypothesis 2:  we hypothesize that the number of commercial burglaries increased after the outbreak of Covid-19
Alternate Hypothesis 2: we hypothesize that the number of commercial burglaries did not change after the outbreak of Covid-19


Sexual assaults 
Null Hypothesis 3: we hypothesize that the number of sexual assaults changed after the outbreak of Covid-19
Alternate Hypothesis 3: we hypothesize that the number of sexual assaults did not change after the outbreak of Covid-19


Drug offences 
Null Hypothesis 4: we hypothesize that the number of drug offences changed after the outbreak of Covid-19
Alternate Hypothesis 4: we hypothesize that the number of drug offences did not change after the outbreak of Covid-19




-presentation of data visualisations


B] DATA COLLECTION 

1) sources of data 
-explain how he data was collected 
-limitations of having just one data source

The data sets we used for London crime rates between 2008-2020 was retrieved from the Metropolitan Police, under the : Recorded Crime: Geographic Breakdown section.

This is our main source of data, which is a limitation as we are only relying on one source which reduces the objectivity of our research.

The dataset shows monthly crime rates per borough per crime type .

We chose this source for our data because other data sources either dealt with yearly crime rates in individual boroughs or monthly rates for crime categories. Also, the dataset is in csv format. 
Find the dataset for London crime rates from December 2018 to November 2020 (MPS Borough Level Crime (24 months.csv) and from January 2008 to December 2018 (MPS_Borough_Level_Crime_Historic.csv).

-> in our github repository under datasets:

-> or download directly from the London Datastore 



2) cleaning the data
->explain the steps of cleaning the data 
->difficulties cleaning the data 
->use for cleaned data 

*Cleaning of the data for the predictive model*

In building the ARIMA predictive model and bar charts, one of the main challenges and consequential components of the code was the section on data cleaning. 

The two datasets we were working with, downloaded from the Metropolitan Police website were not in the correct format for importing into our code. To make our visualisations the most reproducible we wrote a code to ‘clean our data’. 
We had five goals in re-formatting our raw datasets: 
To get rid of the crimes our research was not focussing on:
The data sets downloaded from the Met Police website had many crimes, however, the group decided to only look at 6: ‘Burglary - Business and Community’, ‘Burglary - Residential’, ‘Drug Trafficking’, ‘Possession of Drugs’, ‘Rape’ and ‘Other Sexual Offenses’. Hence, we needed our code to get rid of all the other crimes. 
df1.drop(labels=["Arson and Criminal Damage","Miscellaneous Crimes Against Society", "Possession of Weapons", "Public Order Offences", "Robbery", "Theft", "Vehicle Offences", "Violence Against the Person"],
    axis=0,
    inplace=True
Note: this was also done for df2
 >INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

To get rid of the Borough column.
Our datasets were defined geographically by borough in London. The visualisations we wished to make needed the dataset to show the respective crime and time in mm/yyyy, irregardless of which borough. 
df1.drop (['LookUp_BoroughName'], axis=1, inplace=True) 
Note: this was also done for df2
>INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

To change the names of the crimes in one of the data sets so that the same crimes had the same name throughout the dataframe:
When combining the two data sets, the crimes would have the same name. For example, ‘Burglary- Residential’ was called ‘Burglary in Dwellings’ in one of the data sets. We changed it to ‘Burglary-Residential’ to ensure consistency of our data. 
df2.rename(index = {"Burglary in Other Buildings": "Burglary - Business and Community",  "Burglary in a Dwelling":"Burglary - Residential", "Other Sexual":"Other Sexual Offences"}, inplace = True) 
 
 >INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

To sum all the values for each crime for every month
Using the group.by() function so that we could plot the sums for our visualisations.
df1= df1.groupby(by='MONTH').sum()

>INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

To transpose our data set
So that all the variables would be in columns, rather than crime being in rows and months in columns.
df1.T.head()

>INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

To combine the two data set 
We have two data sets: one for the last 24 months (2018-2020), and one that starts in 2008 and ends where the first one starts and we needed to combine them into one dataframe.
df3 = pd.concat([df2, df1], axis=1, join='inner')
df3.head()
df3_final = df3.T
df3_final.head()

>INSERT RELEVANT CODE GIST

In order to use the cleaned data in the predictive model, we selected each crime according to time from the final data frame: 
rape = df3_final[["Rape"]]
rape.head()



C]DATA VISUALISATIONS AND ANALYSIS 

1) scatter plots 
-motivation in doing scatterplots and what they bring to the project
-explain how they were done and link to github gist 
-limitations 

2)cloropleth map
-explain how the map works
-explain motivations and what the map brings to the project 
-code gists
-explain the worflow in mking the map: difficulties and explanation of changing map type 
-limitations

3) ARIMA predictive model
-explain motivation in choosing model
-explain aims of model and what it brings to project 
-explain coding process and process of putting the cleaned data inside 
-interpret the results 
-explain the accuracy
-limitations 


D] CONCLUSION 
-answering the research question 
-interpreting data analsysis findings 
-how does this resaerch fit into the wider context and what can still be done in future research 















#research on interpreting data anaslyis 

ARIMA MODEL

-> interpreting the accuracy:
https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/194453/interpreting-accuracy-results-for-an-arima-model-fit

Out of all the one simplest to understand is MAPE (Mean absolute percentage error). It considers actual values fed into model and fitted values from the model and calculates absolute difference between the two as a percentage of actual value and finally calculates mean of that.
https://towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-part-19-time-series-and-autoregressive-integrated-moving-average-model-arima-c1005347b0d7
